# SMOKE

The Sparse Matrix Operator Kernel Emissions (SMOKE) Modeling System was originally developed at MCNC to integrate emissions data processing with high-performance computing (HPC) sparse-matrix algorithms. SMOKE is now under active development at the Institute for the Environment and is partially supported by the Community Modeling and Analysis System (CMAS).

SMOKE is primarily an emissions processing system designed to create gridded, speciated, hourly emissions for input into a variety of air quality models such as CMAQ, REMSAD, CAMX and UAM. SMOKE supports area, biogenic, mobile (both onroad and nonroad), and point source emissions processing for criteria, particulate, and toxic pollutants. For biogenic emissions modeling, SMOKE uses the Biogenic Emission Inventory System, version 2.5 (BEIS2) and version 3.09 and 3.14 (BEIS3). SMOKE is also integrated with the on-road emissions model MOBILE6 and MOVES.

The sparse matrix approach used throughout SMOKE permits rapid and flexible processing of emissions data. Rapid processing is possible because SMOKE uses a series of matrix calculations rather than a less-efficient sequential approach used by previous systems. Flexible processing comes from splitting the processing steps of inventory growth, controls, chemical speciation, temporal allocation, and spatial allocation into independent steps whenever possible. The results from these steps are merged together in the final stage of processing using vector-matrix multiplication. This means that individual steps (such as adding a new control strategy, or processing for a different grid) can be performed and merged without having to redo all of the other processing steps.

SMOKE is written in Fortran 90 and is designed to run on a variety of UNIX platforms. We currently provide executables for Linux and the source code is available for download and can easily be compiled for your particular system. We do not support running SMOKE on Windows, due to the inherent limitations of that system. The current version of SMOKE is version 2.5, although versions 1.5 - 2.4 are still available for download.

The original SMOKE concept was envisioned in the early 1990's at MCNC by Dr. Carlie Coats, now of Baron Advanced Meteorology Services. Marc Houyoux managed the development of SMOKE until his departure to the U.S. EPA Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards in 2002. With active-development continuing at the CEMPD, lead SMOKE development was passed from Catherine Seppanen to Dr. B.H. Baek in 2005. While some SMOKE development is occurring outside of CEMPD, the primary line of development is managed by Dr. Baek under funding from the U.S. EPA.
